what do you want me to do here do you
want me to criticize the film
do you want me to criticize the
filmmaker like
do we talk about this movie just as an
artifact
sitting on the shelf of a museum
of our times as they unfold or do we
deal with the fact
that ali tabrizi is somebody i have
known
for years i know his story
both as it is revealed by this film
and as it is concealed by this film
and that i am myself in myriad
impalpable emotional ways
linked to the creation of this movie and
moreover
moreover my 500
most regular viewers on this channel not
all of you
but about 500 of you you
all also remember ali tabrizi
from youtube before he deleted every
trace of himself in his channel
you remember the strange prequel to this
film
that was the c-spiricy youtube video
that ultimately indirectly ended up
inspiring and leading the creation
of this film now that's available on
netflix so what
what am i supposed to address here
when i tell you that this film begins
with
autobiographical reflections on the
motivations of the filmmaker
many of you at least 500 of you will
right away say oh wow
okay so he's going to talk about the
fact that he used to hang out with
dorian ryder and freeway
right that he used to be a vegan
youtuber amongst vegan youtubers
before he got into this idea of making a
documentary film about you know
the fishing industry nope not at all
this opens with a sort of parallel
universe version of the life of ali
tabrizi
in which he was a big fan of jacques
cousteau
and was walking down the beach cleaning
up garbage
and in which he wasn't vegan at all he
hadn't even
thought about veganism until the
shocking end of this film
where there's a plot twist and he
realizes the key that unlocks the door
the solution to the riddle the big
mystery
it's veganism this is about as strange
as if i asked you guys for money on
kickstarter
so i could make a documentary film about
black
american rappers who are vegan
let's just say i did it's actually not
that implausible i could go down to the
detroit and start interviewing guys
so i want to look at african-american
hip-hop
and then the vegan subculture
overlapping with that
emerging from i'm gonna do a documentary
about that so you guys all
donate 50 bucks yeah i can take my 200
camera and make this film and you guys
know me from youtube you know you know
you know my interest
like i'm someone who grew up knowing
hip-hop and then after a certain point
in my
life i knew about veganism and then i
brought these interests together
and instead this film begins with me
saying like what is veganism
i never even heard of this thing before
but then one day
when i was innocently listening to rap
music expecting vivid imagery of
gangsters robbing banks and drug dealers
disputing
who is gonna have sex with that hoe next
to my surprise i learned that many of
the vocalists
were vegan like i decided to investigate
and step by step as my journey took me
to
scenic detroit michigan i discovered
like dude like am i gonna pretend
that the shocking conclusion of this
film is that me interviewing these guys
convinces me to become vegan that it
wasn't some kind of
prior vested interest i had or that it
wasn't the thesis
for the film or the raison d'etre for
the film before i made it
yeah ali tabrizi's conspiracy
takes the very very strange storytelling
approach
of completely fictionalizing the
narrator
fictionalizing the genesis of the film
itself the raison d'etre for the film
and then including all that information
within the film
when it really doesn't need to be there
speaking of a parallel universe
if i were in the position of editing
this film
before it was shown to a film festival
audience
let's say we have a documentary film
festival in
a small town in michigan wherever it
doesn't matter
what i would do to improve the film to
make it more appealing to that audience
is probably chop off
the first 25 percent i mean roughly i
did not count the number of minutes
but something like the first 25
of this film i feel is terrible
and then you get into kind of the main
middle portion of the film
which is as you should expect fact
fact fact it's just an avalanche
of interesting facts about how horrible
the fishing industry is
the whaling industry is the ecological
consequences that's
well presented as i said
in my critique of cowspiracy in some
ways the
spiritual antecedent to this film and
i'll come back to that because this film
in many ways
awkwardly imitates the formula of
cowspiracy
an earlier documentary film to frankly
an embarrassing extent
but you know uh i said about that
earlier film also
if you already know this stuff
it's not going to be that interesting
for you i watched this
with my girlfriend and there were
several points which was like oh that's
interesting never heard about them
before and i was like
yeah well i've heard exactly that before
i've read articles about that
already 20 years ago there's nothing
there's nothing wrong with that
except when there's something wrong with
it which is at several points i was
saying
it seems as though the filmmakers never
made up their minds
as to what extent they were presenting
this to an audience of children
and to what extent they were trying to
reach out to sophisticated adults
so to give an example the issue of
floating plastic in the ocean comes up
several times if you want to present
that to an audience of sophisticated
adults
you could broach the issue by saying you
know starting in the year 2000
this became mainstream news it was on
the cover of time magazine
it was on the cover of national
geographic there was this mainstream
advertising campaign with this famous
movie star that drew attention the issue
you could broach the issue as something
the audience is likely to have already
heard of
or already ignored you could even
present different controversial
views on well some people accept it was
a big deal and some people just
whatever you want to do and this film
instead while being
completely inappropriate for children
not being a children's documentary
in any way whatsoever it talks about all
these things
the majority of the issues introduced in
the movie are news like
did you have any idea that there's
floating plastic
in the ocean you know i just
heard about this i was shocked i was
surprised when i for the first time
heard there's floating plastic in the
ocean and
you know even if that were sincere and
the film
suffers because of the insincerity of
the narrator
as already hinted at but if that were
sincere like if you were someone who
just
never heard this stuff before you're
hearing about it the first time and you
want to
share your sense of shock and
incredulity
you have to think as a filmmaker about
the position that puts the audience in
because almost anyone who is
gonna click to watch this film is gonna
somehow
pay to see this film under whatever
circumstances there's someone who
already has
a pretty significant degree of
ecological
literacy right they are someone who has
at least seen the stories on the cover
of
national geographic and time magazine
they have been exposed so
yeah i feel that the filmmakers chose to
put themselves at a
really strange disadvantage in this way
now after that first 25
of the film which i feel is the weakest
part and i would urge you
like if you're watching this and you
feel impatient skip ahead because there
are some really good enjoyable parts of
them later on
but you might not enjoy the first part
you might you know you might stop
watching you might
give up on it entirely whereas we get a
lot
of first-person reflections from a very
insincere fictionalized version of the
narrator in that first 25
then in the rest of the film there are
no explanations for the very strange
situations we see the filmmaker living
through
like why didn't you have a japanese
translator when you were in japan why
didn't you have
a thai translator someone speaking tai
for you why didn't you conduct
these interviews in other circumstances
if you wanted to get
that interview with that corporate head
why didn't you wear a suit and tie and
present yourself and like
like there are a lot of really obvious
questions that come up in watching the
remainder of the film
and you have this incongruous contrast
between the carefully
crafted first person story that opens
the film
and the absence of any such narrative in
the remainder
now look my my original inspiration
with ali tabrizi was actually a youtube
video he made on a totally unrelated
topic
where he talked on camera about
masturbation
he got a question from the audience he
was sitting here with another guy
another vegan activist at the time who's
now
he ended up in a nut house literally he
ended up in a mental asylum he's a holy
sort but
these two guys they're on camera doing a
video together and the question from the
audience is about watching porn and
master vision
and you know this is just a few split
seconds long
but i remember it as if it were an hour
they get this question
and they kind of look at each other and
they look down at the floor and they
look at the camera
and you know they just waffle their way
out
they just there's just really no answer
at all
i remember sitting there watching and
thinking that is the exact
opposite of everything i want to do on
youtube
that is the exact opposite of everything
i want to do
as a filmmaker as a writer as an author
as a creative person like
no if you are getting on camera to talk
about pornography
and masturbation you commit and you go
all the way you give it a hundred and
ten percent
you give it all the authenticity you
have got to give
right and there's got to be intensity
and there's got to be
feeling and there's got to be personal
integrity and there's got to be a sense
of personal risk too right like you know
i don't know so ellie tabrizi again in
that particular sense
he got this question about masturbation
porn he just backed off he just wasn't
going to deal with it now you know i had
my own conflict with him
where i was like look dude this is
what's happening with durianrider and
we're going to court and it was a big
conflict
he was on durianrider's side a lot of
you guys i've got he has to remember
that
he just backed off of that you could say
i didn't hear from from a couple years
as a result
but um you know
when i first got involved in youtube i
had to think about it
a lot and there is risk and there is
sorrow and there is suffering and there
is a personal cost
i mean in some ways my life would be
easier if i just never mentioned
that i'm getting divorced if i just
never mentioned that i have
a daughter and i'm struggling to have
custody and visitation rights for my
daughter
like in so many ways socially and in
terms of my employability if i never
mention any of my
political views on any controversial
subject like i could have come on
youtube and i could have done
fundraising
to open my own uh vegan petting zoo
animal sanctuary and people would have
supported there was a way to play this
game to win
and i had to decide early on no what i'm
committed to is my own
sense of personal integrity and that's
gonna produce
content that has certain advantages and
disadvantages shall we say
right i'm gonna live with the
consequences of my personal integrity
and that
includes being honest about my own
ignorance being honest about the things
i don't know
being honest about my own motivations
and then also being honest
about whatever it is i have to share
with you
so as someone who is in some ways an
insider to the creation of this
film it's very strange to be able to say
look it's not just that the narrative
presented this film
feels phony i happen to be in a position
to say
as a matter of fact that it is phony and
that does a great disservice
to what would otherwise be
scientifically ecologically politically
and ethically
fairly interesting content